# 3.3.1

Date: 2024-12-25
Tag: 3.3.1

## Overview

3.3.1 is the 2nd [stable][release_policy] version of the 3.3 release
series. It resolves 11 bugs since 3.3.0.

The "stable" label means that we have all planned features implemented and we
see no high-impact issues. However, if you encounter an issue, feel free to
[report it][issues] on GitHub.

[release_policy]: https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/release/policy/
[issues]: https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/issues

## Compatibility

Tarantool 3.x is backward compatible with Tarantool 2.11.x in the binary data
layout, client-server protocol, and replication protocol.

Please [upgrade][upgrade] using the `box.schema.upgrade()` procedure to unlock
all the new features of the 3.x series.

[upgrade]: https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/book/admin/upgrades/

## Bugs fixed

### Core

* Fixed a bug when IPROTO_INDEX_NAME was mapped into a wrong index identifier (gh-9923).

### Vinyl

* Fixed a bug when a tuple could disappear from a multikey index in case it
  replaced a tuple with duplicate multikey array entries created in the same
  transaction. With the `defer_deletes` space option enabled, the bug could
  also trigger a crash (gh-10869, gh-10870).
* Fixed a bug when the tuple cache was not properly invalidated in case
  a WAL write error occurred while committing a `space.delete()` operation.
  The bug could lead to a crash or an invalid read query result (gh-10879).
* Fixed a bug when a deleted secondary index key wasn't purged on space
  compaction with the `defer_deletes` option enabled (gh-10895).
* Fixed a use-after-free bug in the transaction manager that could be triggered
  by a race between DDL and DML operations affecting the same space (gh-10707).

### Replication

* Fixed a bug when anonymous replicas could participate in elections or even
  be chosen as a leader. It is now forbidden to configure a replica so
  that `replication_anon` is `true` and `election_mode` is not `off`
  (gh-10561).

### Config

* Don't fail if the `sharding.roles` option is not set for some instances
  (gh-10458).
* `schema:get()`/`schema:set()` and `config:get()` no longer change the
  passed path if it is passed as a table (gh-10855).
* Now Tarantool writes a detailed error message if it finds
  replica sets with the same names in different groups, or instances
  with the same names in different replica sets in the provided
  configuration (gh-10347).
* `<schema object>:merge()` now performs a deep merge inside an `any` scalar
  value if left-hand and right-hand values are both tables, where all the keys
  are strings. This way, cluster configuration options that are marked as
  `any` in the schema (fields of `app.cfg` and `roles_cfg`) are merged deeply
  (gh-10450).
* Fixed `on_event` roles callback receiving wrong `config` argument (gh-10934).
