# 3.7.1

Date: 2026-07-09
Tag: 3.7.1

## Overview

Tarantool 3.x is the recommended release series. Users of Tarantool 2.11 are
encouraged to update to the latest 3.x release.

This release resolves 21 bugs since 3.7.0.

Please consider the full list of user-visible changes below.

## Compatibility

Tarantool 2.x and 3.x are compatible in the binary data layout, client-server
protocol, and replication protocol. It means upgrade may be performed with zero
downtime for read requests and the order-of-network-lag downtime for write
requests.

Please follow the [upgrade procedure][upgrade] to plan your update actions.

Users of Tarantool 2.x may be interested in the [compat][compat] options that
allow to imitate some 2.x behavior. This allows to perform application code
update step-by-step, not all-at-once.

[compat]: https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/reference/configuration/configuration_reference/#compat

[upgrade]: https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/book/admin/upgrades/

## Bugs fixed

### Core

* Fixed a double-free bug that occurred at exit when application threads were
  configured (gh-12631).
* Fixed an assertion failure in `fiber_signal_reset()` that occurred during
  application threads initialization on CentOS 7 based systems (gh-12846).
* Fixed a heap-use-after-free bug when a `space.before_replace` trigger yielded
  with disabled MVCC (gh-12779).
* Fixed a stack overflow when checking MsgPack input with deeply nested values
  containing extension types
  ([ghs-162](https://github.com/tarantool/security/issues/162)).
* Fixed an issue where zero values were incorrectly rejected by fixed-point
  decimal fields when their scale was greater than or equal to their precision
  (gh-12808).

### Memtx

* Fixed a bug in MVCC `read-confirmed` isolation where `delete` and `update`
  could see an incorrect tuple (gh-12260).

### Replication

* Fixed a crash that could occur when a replication source was removed from
  `box.cfg.replication` at the same time as the node reached its maximum WAL
  queue size (configured by `box.cfg.wal_queue_max_size`) (gh-12719).
* Fixed a replica sending its master an outdated acknowledgement right after
  reconnecting, which made the replica's vclock progress appear to move
  backwards on the master in `box.info.replication` (gh-12795).
* Fixed a bug where replicas kept their old connection to the master and
  ignored changes to replication parameters (gh-12728).
* `election_mode='off'` has been reworked internally. A promoted off-mode
   node will now be reported as `'leader'` in `box.info.election.state`.
   Additionally, such nodes are now able to vote for other nodes that may
   have different election modes (gh-8095).

### LuaJIT

Backported patches from the vanilla LuaJIT trunk (gh-12480). The following
issues were fixed as part of this activity:

* Fixed incorrect JIT behavior for vararg FFI functions on the macOS AArch64
  platform (gh-6097).
* Fixed various FFI ABI and calling convention issues for x64/AArch64
  architectures.
* Fixed `ipairs_aux()` to match JIT backend behavior on x86/x64.
* Fixed `os.time()` returning `-1`.
* Fixed UBSan warnings for `table.new()`.

### SQL

* Added permission checks when creating a trigger in SQL.
  Now only users with 'alter' privileges on a table can create
  triggers for that table
  ([ghs-163](https://github.com/tarantool/security/issues/163)).
* Fixed collisions of prepared statement IDs - now a new prepared statement
  will always be assigned a free ID (gh-12537).
* An error now occurs if a column appears more than once in a subquery of
  a SELECT statement (gh-12337).

### Lua

#### Datetime

* Fixed parsing for time with a decimal fraction of hour or minute (gh-12082).
* Fixed a stack overflow `strptime()` function when parsing
  timezones ([ghs-146](https://github.com/tarantool/security/issues/146)).

#### Pickle

* Fixed abortion on calling `pack()` with an empty format string
  or a string value for the `'a'` format specifier (gh-12063).
