=head1 NAME

tarantool_box - open-source NoSQL database

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    tarantool_box [OPTIONS]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Tarantool is an open-source NoSQL database, developed by Mail.ru.

Its key properties include:

=over

=item *
    
Licence: simplified BSD

=item *
    
All data is maintained in RAM

=item *
    
Data persistence is implemented using Write Ahead Log and snapshotting

=item *
    
Supports asynchronous replication and hot standby

=item *
    
Uses coroutines and asynchronous I/O to implement
high-performance lock-free access to data

=item *
    
Available on Linux and FreeBSD

=item *
    
Stored procedures in Lua are supported.

=back

=head2 Data model

The basic atom of storage in Tarantool is called tuple. A tuple
can have arbitrary number of fields. The first field in the tuple
is always the identifying unique key. Tuples form spaces. It is
possible to search tuples in spaces using the primary or secondary
keys. Fields in a tuple are type-agnostic. It is possible to change,
as well as add or remove fields.

=head1 Command-line options

=over

=item --cfg-get=KEY

Returns a value from configuration file described by B<KEY>.

=item --check-config

Checks configuration file for errors.

=item -c FILE, --config=FILE

Points a path to configuration file (default: B</etc/tarantool.cfg>).

=item --cat=FILE

Cats snapshot file to stdout in readable format and exits.

=item --init-storage

Initializes storage (an empty snapshot file) and exits.

=item -v, --verbose

Increases verbosity level in log messages.

=item -B, --background

Redirects input/output streams to a log file and runs as
daemon.

=item -h, --help

Displays helpscreen and exits.

=item -V, --version

Prints program version and exits.

=back


